Updated Theming Cookbook for M3 (#9183)
flutter/website: src/cookbook/design/themes.md

<?code-excerpt path-base="cookbook/design/themes"?>

{{site.alert.note}}

> This recipe uses the [Material 3 design specification][] and the [google_fonts] package.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  This recipe uses the [Material 3 design specification][] and the [google_fonts] package.
```

{{site.alert.end}}

[Material 3 design specification]: https://m3.material.io
[google_fonts]: {{site.pub-pkg}}/google_fonts

To share colors and font styles throughout an app, use themes.

> You can define app-wide themes, add widget `Theme` widgets, or both.

Reviewer 2: Add a link to ```[`Theme`][]``` ]the first time it appears.

You can define app-wide themes.
You can extend a theme to change a theme style for one component.
Each theme defines the colors, type style, and other parameters

> applicable for the type of Material component.

Author: This whole page is about Material themes. We can discuss Cupertino at another time.

If a widget doesn't use a specific theme,

> the visual properties fall back to the main theme.

Reviewer 3: I like that you added this discussion earlier.

But the following list contradicts the statement that "the visual properties fall back to the main theme". Could we just drop this sentence and have just the "Flutter applies styling in the following order:"?

> the visual properties fall back to the main theme.

Author: ```suggestion
the visual properties fall back to the main theme.
```
```suggestion
the visual properties fall back to the immediate parent theme.
```

> the visual properties fall back to the main theme.

Author: ```suggestion
```

> If a widget doesn't use a specific theme,
> the visual properties fall back to the main theme.

Author: ```suggestion
```

Flutter applies styling in the following order:

> 1. Style applied to the specific widget.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
1. Styles applied to the specific widget.
```

> 1. Themes that override the main theme.

Author: ```suggestion
1. Themes that override the immediate parent theme.
```

[`TextButton`]: {{site.api}}/flutter/material/TextButton-class.html
[`TextButtonTheme`]: {{site.api}}/flutter/material/TextButtonTheme-class.html
[`TextButtonThemeData`]: {{site.api}}/flutter/material/TextButtonThemeData-class.html

If a widget doesn't use a specific theme, the visual properties fall back

> to the main theme. Precedence in Themes rank from the specific widget,
> to the widget type theme, to the general Theme.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
to the main theme. Precedence in themes rank from the specific widget,
to the widget type theme, to the general theme.
```

To share a `Theme` across your entire app, set the `theme` property
to your `MaterialApp` constructor.
This property takes a [`ThemeData`][] instance.

> To enable Material 3, set the [`useMaterial3`][] argument

Author: ```suggestion
To enable Material 3, set the [`useMaterial3`][] property
```

> After you define a Theme, use it within your own widgets.
> Flutter's Material widgets use your Theme to set the background
> colors and font styles for AppBars, Buttons, Checkboxes, and more.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
After you define a `Theme`, use it within your own widgets.
Flutter's Material widgets use your theme to set the background
colors and font styles for app bars, buttons, checkboxes, and more.
```

> To share a Theme across your entire app, add a `theme` property

Reviewer: ```suggestion
To share a `Theme` across your entire app, add a `theme` property
```

to your `MaterialApp` constructor.
This property takes a takes a [`ThemeData`][] widget.

To enable Material 3, add the [`useMaterial3`][] property
to the `ThemeData` widget.

> If you don't add a `theme` to the constructor,

Reviewer: ```suggestion
If you don't add a theme to the constructor,
```

<?code-excerpt path-base="cookbook/design/themes"?>

{{site.alert.note}}

>   This recipe uses the [Material 3 design specification][] and

Author: **reply:** Fair. Fixed.

{{site.alert.note}}
  This recipe uses Flutter's support for [Material 3][] and
  the [google_fonts][] package.
{{site.alert.end}}

[Material 3]: https://m3.material.io
[google_fonts]: {{site.pub-pkg}}/google_fonts

To share colors and font styles throughout an app, use themes.

You can define app-wide themes, add [`Theme`][] widgets
to other component widgets, or both.
Each theme defines the colors, type style, and other parameters applicable
for the type of Material component.

Many Material 3 widgets have their own `Theme` widget and
related `ThemeData` data class.
The `Theme` widget itself applies to the whole `MaterialApp`.

For example: [`TextButton`][] can use both [`TextButtonTheme`][] to apply a theme
and [`TextButtonThemeData`][] to define the visual properties of that theme.
Unlike the general app theme, the `TextButtonThemeData` can include the button's
width, height, padding, and other positioning choices.

[`TextButton`]: {{site.api}}/flutter/material/TextButton-class.html
[`TextButtonTheme`]: {{site.api}}/flutter/material/TextButtonTheme-class.html
[`TextButtonThemeData`]: {{site.api}}/flutter/material/TextButtonThemeData-class.html

> If a widget doesn't use a specific theme, the visual properties fall back
> to the main theme. Precedence in themes rank from the specific widget,
> to the widget type theme, to the general theme.

Reviewer 4: Not super clear

```suggestion
Typically, visual properties are resolved first with the.
widget properties (e.g. `AppBar.centerTitle`). If not specified, then the widget theme (e.g. `AppBarTheme.centerTitle` of the ambient theme) is used. If not specified, then some
reasonable default is used.
```

Author: This copy doesn't read clearly. Stet.

Reviewer 3: @atsansone I also think it's important to handle this clarification before this lands. It's not clear what "If a widget doesn't use a specific theme" means and the existing text doesn't account for the properties on the widgets themselves as `@guidezpl` highlighted in his suggestion.

After you define a `Theme`, use it within your own widgets.
Flutter's Material widgets use your theme to set the background

> colors and font styles for app bars, buttons, checkboxes, and more.

Author: I pulled this back some.

## Create an app theme

To share a `Theme` across your entire app, add a `theme` property
to your `MaterialApp` constructor.
This property takes a [`ThemeData`][] instance.

To enable Material 3, add the [`useMaterial3`][] property,
set to a value of `true`, to the `ThemeData` instance.

If you don't add a theme to the constructor,
Flutter creates a default theme for you.

[`useMaterial3`]: {{site.api}}/flutter/material/ThemeData/useMaterial3.html

<?code-excerpt "lib/theme.dart (MaterialApp)" replace="/return //g"?>
```dart
MaterialApp(
  title: appName,
  theme: ThemeData(
    useMaterial3: true,

    // Define the default brightness and colors.

>     colorScheme: ColorScheme.fromSwatch(

Reviewer 4: same here

<?code-excerpt "lib/main.dart (Theme)"?>
```dart
Theme(
  // Create a unique theme with `ThemeData`.
  data: ThemeData(
      colorScheme: ColorScheme.fromSeed(
    seedColor: Colors.pink,
  )),
  child: FloatingActionButton(
    onPressed: () {},
    child: const Icon(Icons.add),
  ),
);
```

### Extend the parent theme

Instead of overriding everything, consider extending the parent theme.
To extend a theme, use the [`copyWith()`][] method.

<?code-excerpt "lib/main.dart (ThemeCopyWith)"?>
```dart
Theme(
  // Find and extend the parent theme using `copyWith`.
  // To learn more, check out the section on `Theme.of`.
  data: Theme.of(context).copyWith(
      colorScheme: ColorScheme.fromSeed(
    seedColor: Colors.pink,
  )),
  child: const FloatingActionButton(
    onPressed: null,
    child: Icon(Icons.add),
  ),
);
```

## Watch a video on `Theme`

To learn more, watch this short Widget of the Week video on the `Theme` widget:

<iframe class="full-width" src="{{site.youtube-site}}/embed/oTvQDJOBXmM" frameborder="0" allow="accelerometer; autoplay; encrypted-media; gyroscope; picture-in-picture" allowfullscreen></iframe>

## Try an interactive example

> <?code-excerpt "lib/main.dart"?>

Author: ```suggestion
<?code-excerpt "lib/main.dart (FullApp)"?>
```

);
```

Most instances of `ThemeData` set values for the following two properties. These properties affect the entire app.

1. [`colorScheme`][] defines the colors.
1. [`textTheme`][] defines text styling.

[`colorScheme`]: {{site.api}}/flutter/material/ThemeData/colorScheme.html
[`textTheme`]: {{site.api}}/flutter/material/ThemeData/textTheme.html

To learn what colors and fonts you can define,
check out the [`ThemeData`][] documentation.

## Apply a theme

> To apply your new theme, add the `Theme.of(context)` method within a widget's styling properties. These include, but are not limited to, `style` and `color`.

Reviewer 3: - Semantic breaks
- It's not just the `Theme.of` call, so perhaps "use" instead of "add"?
- Not all widgets include those two properties, so we should clarify that.

```suggestion
To apply your new theme, use the `Theme.of(context)` method 
when specifying a widget's styling properties.
These can include, but are not limited to, `style` and `color`.
```

The `Theme.of(context)` method looks up the widget tree and retrieves
the nearest `Theme` in the tree.
If you have a standalone `Theme` as defined in the previous example,
that's applied.
If not, Flutter applies the app's theme.

> In fact, the `Container` uses this technique to find its `color``.

Reviewer 3: I think the original use "In fact" was referring to Flutter's implementation of `FloatingActionButton`, not the following code. `Container` itself doesn't use `Theme.of` as far as I know.

Perhaps you can adjust this to refer to the implementation of `FloatingActionButton` and add a new sentence introducing the next code snippet?

<?code-excerpt "lib/main.dart (Container)" replace="/^child: //g"?>
```dart
Container(
  padding: const EdgeInsets.symmetric(
    horizontal: 12,
    vertical: 12,
  ),
  color: Theme.of(context).colorScheme.primary,
  child: Text(
    'Text with a background color',
    // ···
    style: Theme.of(context).textTheme.bodyMedium!.copyWith(
          color: Theme.of(context).colorScheme.onPrimary,
        ),
  ),
),
```

## Override a theme

To override the overall theme in part of an app,
wrap that section of the app in a `Theme` widget.

You can override a theme in two ways:

1. Create a unique `ThemeData` instance.
2. Extend the parent theme.

### Set a unique `ThemeData` instance

If you want a component of your app to ignore the overall theme,

> create a `ThemeData()` instance.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
create a `ThemeData` instance.
```

Pass that instance to the `Theme` widget.

<?code-excerpt "lib/main.dart (Theme)"?>
```dart
Theme(
  // Create a unique theme with `ThemeData`.
  data: ThemeData(
      colorScheme: ColorScheme.fromSeed(
    seedColor: Colors.pink,
  )),
  child: FloatingActionButton(
    onPressed: () {},
    child: const Icon(Icons.add),
  ),
);
```

### Extend the parent theme

Instead of overriding everything, consider extending the parent theme.
To extend a theme, use the [`copyWith()`][] method.

<?code-excerpt "lib/main.dart (ThemeCopyWith)"?>
```dart
Theme(
  // Find and extend the parent theme using `copyWith`.

>   // To learn more, check out the next section on `Theme.of`.

Reviewer 3: Since you moved the `Theme.of` section before this, either say "preceding section" or just drop this line.

);
```

Most instances of `ThemeData` set values for the following two properties. These properties affect the entire app.

1. [`colorScheme`][] defines the colors.
1. [`textTheme`][] defines text styling.

[`colorScheme`]: {{site.api}}/flutter/material/ThemeData/colorScheme.html
[`textTheme`]: {{site.api}}/flutter/material/ThemeData/textTheme.html

> To learn what colors and fonts you can define,

Author: ```suggestion
To learn what colors, fonts, and other properties, you can define,
```

check out the [`ThemeData`][] documentation.

## Apply a theme

To apply your new theme, use the `Theme.of(context)` method 
when specifying a widget's styling properties.
These can include, but are not limited to, `style` and `color`.

The `Theme.of(context)` method looks up the widget tree and retrieves
the nearest `Theme` in the tree.

> If you have a standalone `Theme` as defined in the previous example,
> that's applied.

Author: ```suggestion
If you have a standalone `Theme`, that's applied.
```

If not, Flutter applies the app's theme.

> In fact, the `Container` uses this technique to find its `color``.

Author: ```suggestion
In the following example, the `Container` constructor uses this technique to set its `color`.
```

  child: Text(
    'Text with a background color',
    // ···
    style: Theme.of(context).textTheme.bodyMedium!.copyWith(
          color: Theme.of(context).colorScheme.onPrimary,
        ),
  ),
),
```

## Override a theme

To override the overall theme in part of an app,
wrap that section of the app in a `Theme` widget.

You can override a theme in two ways:

1. Create a unique `ThemeData` instance.
2. Extend the parent theme.

### Set a unique `ThemeData` instance

If you want a component of your app to ignore the overall theme,
create a `ThemeData` instance.
Pass that instance to the `Theme` widget.

<?code-excerpt "lib/main.dart (Theme)"?>
```dart
Theme(
  // Create a unique theme with `ThemeData`.
  data: ThemeData(
      colorScheme: ColorScheme.fromSeed(
    seedColor: Colors.pink,
  )),
  child: FloatingActionButton(
    onPressed: () {},
    child: const Icon(Icons.add),
  ),
);
```

### Extend the parent theme

Instead of overriding everything, consider extending the parent theme.
To extend a theme, use the [`copyWith()`][] method.

<?code-excerpt "lib/main.dart (ThemeCopyWith)"?>
```dart
Theme(
  // Find and extend the parent theme using `copyWith`.

>   // To learn more, check out the next section on `Theme.of`.

Author: ```suggestion
  // To learn more, check out the section on `Theme.of`.
```

);
```

> Most `ThemeData` objects include two properties.

Reviewer 5: Related to the comment above, technically speaking all ThemeData objects have those two properties -- they just aren't always specifically assigned by the app developer when calling the constructor.

If this sentence is intended to make the point that textTheme and colorScheme are two of the most important and commonly used properties of ThemeData, that's a great thing to include. Consider just calling it out directly that way.

1. [`colorScheme`][] defines colors.
1. [`textTheme`][] defines text styling.

[`colorScheme`]: {{site.api}}/flutter/material/ThemeData/colorScheme.html
[`textTheme`]: {{site.api}}/flutter/material/ThemeData/textTheme.html

To learn what colors and fonts you can define,
check out the [`ThemeData`][] documentation.

## Override a theme

To override the overall theme in part of an app,
wrap that section of the app in a `Theme` widget.

You can override a theme in two ways:

1. Create a unique `ThemeData` instance.
2. Extend the parent theme.

{{site.alert.note}}
  To learn more, watch this short Widget of the Week video on the Theme widget:

  <iframe class="full-width" src="{{site.youtube-site}}/embed/oTvQDJOBXmM" frameborder="0" allow="accelerometer; autoplay; encrypted-media; gyroscope; picture-in-picture" allowfullscreen></iframe>
{{site.alert.end}}

### Set a unique `ThemeData` instance

If you want a component of your app to ignore the overall theme,

> create a `ThemeData()` instance.

Reviewer 5: FWIW, this is perfect. ThemeData instance and Theme widget is exactly correct terminology.

);
```

> Most instances of `ThemeData` set values for two properties.

Author: I vetted this with engineering. It's good.

1. [`colorScheme`][] defines colors.
1. [`textTheme`][] defines text styling.

[`colorScheme`]: {{site.api}}/flutter/material/ThemeData/colorScheme.html
[`textTheme`]: {{site.api}}/flutter/material/ThemeData/textTheme.html

To learn what colors and fonts you can define,
check out the [`ThemeData`][] documentation.

## Override a theme

To override the overall theme in part of an app,
wrap that section of the app in a `Theme` widget.

You can override a theme in two ways:

1. Create a unique `ThemeData` instance.
2. Extend the parent theme.

{{site.alert.note}}
  To learn more, watch this short Widget of the Week video on the Theme widget:

  <iframe class="full-width" src="{{site.youtube-site}}/embed/oTvQDJOBXmM" frameborder="0" allow="accelerometer; autoplay; encrypted-media; gyroscope; picture-in-picture" allowfullscreen></iframe>

> {{site.alert.end}}

Author: Made a different change.

### Set a unique `ThemeData` instance

If you want a component of your app to ignore the overall theme,
create a `ThemeData()` instance.
Pass that instance to the `Theme` widget.

<?code-excerpt "lib/theme.dart (Theme)"?>
```dart
Theme(
  // Create a unique theme with `ThemeData`.
  data: ThemeData(

>     primarySwatch: Colors.pink,

Reviewer 4: same here

);
```

### Extend the parent theme

Instead of overriding everything, consider extending the parent theme.
To extend a theme, use the [`copyWith()`][] method.

<?code-excerpt "lib/theme.dart (ThemeCopyWith)"?>
```dart
Theme(
  // Find and extend the parent theme using `copyWith`.
  // To learn more, check out the next
  // section on `Theme.of`.
  data: Theme.of(context).copyWith(
      // TRY THIS: Change the seedColor to "Colors.red" or
      //           "Colors.blue".
      colorScheme: ColorScheme.fromSeed(seedColor: Colors.pink)),
  child: const FloatingActionButton(
    onPressed: null,
    child: Icon(Icons.add),
  ),
);
```

## Apply a Theme

To apply your new theme, add the `Theme.of(context)` method within the
widgets' `build()` methods.

> The `Theme.of(context)` method looks up the widget tree and applies

Reviewer 5: nit: "retrieves" rather than "applies." Technically, `Theme.of` just gives you a reference to the nearest ancestor Theme widget's ThemeData, but doesn't do anything else with it.

);
```

### Extend the parent theme

Instead of overriding everything, consider extending the parent theme.
To extend a theme, use the [`copyWith()`][] method.

<?code-excerpt "lib/theme.dart (ThemeCopyWith)"?>
```dart
Theme(
  // Find and extend the parent theme using `copyWith`.
  // To learn more, check out the next section on `Theme.of`.
  data: Theme.of(context).copyWith(
      // TRY THIS: Change the seedColor to "Colors.red" or

>       //           "Colors.blue".

Reviewer 3: I think the "TRY THIS" sections are likely best left to the interactive example at the end.

      colorScheme: ColorScheme.fromSeed(seedColor: Colors.pink)),
  child: const FloatingActionButton(
    onPressed: null,
    child: Icon(Icons.add),
  ),
);
```

> ## Apply a Theme

Reviewer 3: If this is meant to talk about the `Theme` class, consider putting it in code font. If it's meant to talk about applying a theme in the general sense, make it lower case like the previous section header.

To apply your new theme, add the `Theme.of(context)` method within the

> widgets' `build()` methods.

Reviewer 3: I think if you say "Add the X", it's best to say where to. This sentence nor the next instructions say to where. The current version of the code snippet doesn't show it either.

The `Theme.of(context)` method looks up the widget tree and retrieves
the nearest `Theme` in the tree. If you have a standalone
`Theme` as defined in the previous example, that's applied.

> If not, Flutter applies the app's theme.

Reviewer 3: The theme isn't magically applied by `Theme.of`. If you're wanting to retrieve a value from that retrieved theme, it needs to be explicitly used, as the example below shows.

If you want to keep this text talking about `Theme.of` itself rather than some specific code, I think it's fine to return the wording back to "returned" rather than "applied".

In fact, the `FloatingActionButton` uses this technique to find the

> `accentColor`.

Reviewer 3: I know this is an existing problem, but after I read this sentence, I expect the following code snippet to be about this sentence. Perhaps add a sentence after this directly introducing the code snippet and how it uses `Theme.of`.

I also am not sure if this was talking about the `FloatingActionButton` in the above/below app or the actual implementation of `FloatingActionButton` in Flutter. I think it's talking about the actual implementation of `FloatingActionButton` so perhaps make that clear.

Reviewer 3: Actually, `accentColor` [was deprecated and removed](https://docs.flutter.dev/release/breaking-changes/theme-data-accent-properties) so this note doesn't make sense at all anymore. I suppose it could say something like: 

```
In fact, the `FloatingActionButton` implementation uses
this technique to find its background color.
```

<?code-excerpt "lib/theme.dart (Container)" replace="/^child: //g"?>
```dart
Container(
  padding: const EdgeInsets.symmetric(horizontal: 12, vertical: 12),

>   color: theme.colorScheme.primary,

Reviewer 3: Since you switched the source examples to have `final theme = Theme.of(context)` at the beginning of the `build` methods, these snippets no longer make sense. According to the previous text, they're meant to introduce the `Theme.of` method, but now that is no longer visible.

Either switch the source snippet back to `Theme.of` or include the `final theme = Theme.of(context)` at the beginning of the excerpt.

Author: Agreed. Fixing.

  child: Text(
    'Text with a background color',
    // TRY THIS: Change the Text value
    //           or change the theme.textTheme

>     //           to "displayLarge" or "displaySmall".

Reviewer 3: Similar to earlier, the "TRY THIS" sections are likely best left to the interactive example at the end.

    return MaterialApp(
      title: appName,
      theme: ThemeData(
        useMaterial3: true,

        // Define the default brightness and colors.
        colorScheme: ColorScheme.fromSwatch(

>           primarySwatch: Colors.purple,

Reviewer 4: same here

          // TRY THIS: Change to "Brightness.light"
          //           and see that all colors change
          //           to better contrast a light background
          brightness: Brightness.dark,
        ),

        // Define the default `TextTheme`. Use this to specify the default
        // text styling for headlines, titles, bodies of text, and more.
        textTheme: TextTheme(
          displayLarge:
              const TextStyle(fontSize: 72, fontWeight: FontWeight.bold),
          // TRY THIS: Change one of the GoogleFonts

>           //           to "lato", "poppins", or "lora"

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
          //           to "lato", "poppins", or "lora".
```

          //           The title uses "titleLarge"

>           //           and the middle text uses "bodyMedium"

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
          //           and the middle text uses "bodyMedium".
```
Should you mention what uses `displaySmall` here?

          //           to "lato", "poppins", or "lora"
          //           The title uses "titleLarge"

>           //           and the middle text uses "bodyMedium"

Reviewer 2: I'd move this up one line, above the `bodyMedium` line that it applies to.  Also, should it still refer to `titleLarge`, or should it revert to `displaySmall` here?

Author: **reply:** I changed it to match the code. All is well.

  @override
  Widget build(BuildContext context) {

>     final theme = Theme.of(context); // Simplifies later use of Theme context

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
    final theme = Theme.of(context); // Simplifies later use of Theme context.
```

    return Scaffold(
      appBar: AppBar(
        title: Text(title),
      ),
      body: Center(
        child: Container(
          padding: const EdgeInsets.symmetric(horizontal: 12, vertical: 12),
          color: theme.colorScheme.primary,
          child: Text(
            'Text with a background color',
            // TRY THIS: Change the Text value
            //           or change the theme.textTheme

>             //           to "displayLarge" or "displaySmall"

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
            //           to "displayLarge" or "displaySmall".
```

            style: theme.textTheme.bodyMedium,
          ),
        ),
      ),
      floatingActionButton: Theme(
        data: theme.copyWith(
            // TRY THIS: Change the seedColor to "Colors.red" or

>             //           "Colors.blue"

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
            //           "Colors.blue".
```

    );
  }
}

> void theme(BuildContext context) {
>   Theme(
>     // Create a unique theme with `ThemeData`.
>     data: ThemeData(
>         colorScheme: ColorScheme.fromSeed(
>       seedColor: Colors.pink,
>     )),
>     child: FloatingActionButton(
>       onPressed: () {},
>       child: const Icon(Icons.add),
>     ),
>   );
> 
>   Theme(
>     // Find and extend the parent theme using `copyWith`.
>     // To learn more, check out the next section on `Theme.of`.
>     data: Theme.of(context).copyWith(
>         colorScheme: ColorScheme.fromSeed(
>       seedColor: Colors.pink,
>     )),
>     child: const FloatingActionButton(
>       onPressed: null,
>       child: Icon(Icons.add),
>     ),
>   );
> }

Author: ```suggestion
```

    );
  }
}

> void theme(BuildContext context) {

Author: I had it in its own file. A prior review asked why. I'll fix this.
